---
title: ""
date: 2019-06-17T14:59:07-04:00
---

![Nathan Goldbaum](/ngoldbaum2019.jpg#center)

I am currently attending the Recurse Center with an eye towards moving to
industry software and data roles. I am working on a client for the
[`Mercurial`](https://mercurial-scm.org) distributed version control system in
the `Rust` programming language. I am doing this to learn advanced Rust
concepts, how to scale Rust projects bigger than a single-line script, and also
hopefully to write code that will be useful for the `Mercurial` project's
[oxidation](https://www.mercurial-scm.org/wiki/OxidationPlan) plans.


Before moving to Brooklyn for the summer I was
a research scientist at the University of Illinois' [National Center for
Supercomputing Applications](http://www.ncsa.illinois.edu/) in the [Data
Exploration Lab](https://data-exp-lab.github.io/).

I have extensive experience in open source software as a former maintainer of
The [`yt`](https://yt-project.org) Project, a Python toolkit for working with 3D
simulation data. I am a member of the `yt` steering committee and helped bring
`yt` under the umbrella of [NumFOCUS](https://numfocus.org/project/yt).

I am the current primary maintainer of
[`unyt`](https://github.com/yt-project/unyt/), a library for handling data with
physical units in Python. The `unyt` library was originally created by me during
PhD and released as `yt.units`. Starting last year I refactored `yt.units` into
an independent library with extensive [example-driven
documentation](https://unyt.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) and [100% test
coverage](https://codecov.io/gh/yt-project/unyt). I also published [a
paper](https://joss.theoj.org/papers/dbc27acb614dd33eb02b029ef20e7fe7) in the
Journal of Open Source Software describing the library, its origins, and
comparing performance and software engineering decisions with competing Python
libraries.

In the past I worked on [improving scaling and performance](https://ytep.readthedocs.io/en/master/YTEPs/YTEP-0032.html) when working with
gigabyte and terabyte-scale particle datasets in
`yt` and shared my
experience with the community in [a SciPy conference
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pkZgQIGac6I) in 2017. I am also the
original author of the `PlotWindow` plotting interface that makes opinionated
styling decisions to make it possible to quickly generate publication-quality
visualizations of simulation data using an API based on what the data physically
represent rather than how the data are laid out on-disk. I described the
philosophy behind `PlotWindow` as a domain-specific visualization tool in a
[2016 talk at the PlotCon
conference](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fd4TDoyQffw).

During my PhD I
[ran](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2015ApJ...814..131G/abstract)
[simulations](https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2016ApJ...827...28G/abstract) of
Milky-Way like disk galaxies to understand how global properties of disk
galaxies influence the formation of stellar nurseries and how the energy
deposited by newborn massive stars feeds back to global disk scales, creating a
steady-state system much like our galaxy has experienced for billions of
years. The data and [analysis
software](https://bitbucket.org/ngoldbaum/galaxy_analysis/src/default/) and raw
simulation data used in my thesis are [publicly
available](https://girder.hub.yt/#collection/573647d3dd9119000164acf0). I
described the process of publicly releasing a large tranche of data in [a
talk](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zb0HBu3IhbU) at the Python in Astronomy
conference. I [also talked](https://youtu.be/nzr2vMQqiug?t=358) about exporting
simulation data into a Minecraft server.
